There are certain days that change the
world.
>> Brexit it was one of those days.
>> British people will have the final say
in an in/out referendum.
>> Watch out, here we go.
>> One story dominated the news today and
it is [music] Brexit.
>> Brexit.
>> What has been one of the most divisive
votes
>> It was staggering.
>> History unfolding before our very eyes.
>> The population [music] at large doesn't
trust the establishment.
>> The capacity of independence.
>> Brexit changed the way that politics is
done, not only in the UK, but beyond
that, too.
>> People want to take their country back.
>> Passions that are not unique to Britain.
>> For our NHS.
>> It was a real once-in-a-lifetime moment.
>> But also it's sort of manifestly an act
of economic self-harm.
>> Thing is, not everyone and their dog
arrived at the polling station with an
economics textbook in hand or paw.
>> It's not even the main thing that
mattered to a lot of people who voted to
leave.
>> A cosmopolitan elite had been trying to
redefine [music]
Britain as a multicultural, multiracial,
multiethnic society. [music] And the
Brexiteers said, "No. We are a
particular people, a product of a
particular history with a particular set
of roots."
>> We need our country back.
>> And so on the 23rd of June 2016, more
than 33 million people cast ballots on a
relationship that had shaped Britain's
laws, trade, and politics [music] for
almost half a century.
>> Yes is now showing at 67%.
>> The British people have spoken [music]
and the answer is we're out.
>> By margin of 52 to 48, they said Britain
should exit the European UNION.
>> BIZARRE! INDEPENDENCE DAY!
>> IT MIGHT HAVE FELT SHOCKING, but it
wasn't quite as [music] surprising as I
think a lot of people look back and say
that it was.
>> But it was a political earthquake whose
aftershocks were felt around [music] the
globe.
>> It the world from a world which seemed
to be getting ever closer with
globalization was the dominant theme
into a world that was becoming ever more
fragmented.
>> Brexit has ushered in a decade which has
left Britain, Europe, the West in a
worse shape than it started it. The
issue is
would it have done much better without
it?
>> And it is possible to work [music] that
out. To understand what happened, we can
compare it with a model of what did it.
This is that story. Why Brexit emerged,
what it cost, and what might come next.
>> I remember the day when [music] we voted
on Brexit. I took my dogs for a walk to
the local voting booth. The dogs I think
[music] were pro-Brexit. Dogs tend to be
pro-Brexit. I was anti-Brexit. Do you
want me to say that I voted leave
because I did.
>> [music]
>> The main thing I remember from the
actual day is being woken up by my
husband very early and him saying you've
got to go to work because the result
isn't quite what we expected.
>> events taking place here.
>> No one expected this result.
>> Everyone is stunned.
>> I'd written an essay called the 20%
world which pointed out that if the odds
on Trump being elected, Brexit, and
Corbyn being elected, and Le Pen being
elected in France, [music] they were all
around 20%. What was staggering was that
two of them would happen in one year.
>> Brexit was not just a British upset. It
was an early warning light on the
dashboard of globalization.
>> When the results came in, there was
shock.
>> People were not [music] expecting this.
The markets weren't expecting this. The
smart money thought that it was remain.
>> I was sat at my desk watching [music]
the pound plummet as the results rolled
in.
>> The pound has taken a thumping.
>> Every single industry group's trading in
the red.
>> I realized that we were at the beginning
of a very profound historical change.
>> I do not think it would be right for me
to try to be the captain that steers our
country to its next destination.
>> There were some in the European Union
who looked at a result like that and
thought surely this is going to have to
be rerun. It's such a narrow margin of
victory.
>> I quote damn a bad day for Europe. The
The UK is no more part of the club. I
regret that very much.
>> People said that the money was smart.
The money wasn't smart.
>> Virtually every economic expert told
British people that this would be a very
painful thing to do. And yet people
still voted for that.
>> The campaigns in the run-up to the vote
were were unexpectedly aggressive.
[music]
>> I really remember when the MP Jo Cox was
murdered in her constituency. It felt
symptomatic [music]
of the febrile state of UK politics.
>> May we and the generations of members
that follow us in this house
honor Jo's memory.
>> [music]
>> fury came out of all proportion to what
our relationship with the EU actually
was. It was not a fiscal union. It was
not a military union.
>> At the heart of the Brexit debate was a
[music] disconnect between the winners
and the losers of the global economy.
The winners didn't understand how much
the losers had lost. [music] And they
didn't get any sense of what you lose
when you lose a stable manufacturing
job.
>> You work hard to be better off for your
family, don't you? And now
I'm not sure if I've got that stability
anymore.
>> A few days before the vote [music] there
was a big broadcast audience event on
the BBC. I was part of the presenting
team, surrounded by people who I didn't
[music] know which way they were going
to vote. And there was a moment when
Boris Johnson said
>> I believe that this Thursday can be our
country's Independence Day.
>> And I saw and felt half of the room
erupt around me, and it was really then
that I realized how strong the sentiment
to leave the EU was.
But, there was a snag.
>> We voted to leave, but we didn't know
what voting to leave meant. It was a
sort of blind Brexit. [music]
>> People voted saying they didn't like the
status quo with Europe. They wanted to
get out, but they never got a vote on
what the alternative was.
>> The leave groups were disparate, [music]
not connected, and in many cases looking
for different things.
>> One vision of the future was a sort of
little England vision. We'd retreat to a
sort of hobbit world.
>> You had a group of people who thought
this would [music] be a chance to pump
more money into the NHS, put up walls to
immigrants, and so on and so on.
>> Other view of Brexit was that we would
be a global [music] power.
>> 10 years later, we can begin to assess
what actually happened and compare it to
what didn't.
Don't worry, that'll make sense in a
minute.
>> The economy [music] immediately after
the Brexit vote was much more resilient
than people expected.
>> We were told that the housing market
would collapse, that there would be
apocalyptic consequences [music]
for the economy.
>> But actually consumers, who are the
biggest parts of the UK economy,
continued to spend.
>> You can argue [music] about the economic
effects relentlessly.
>> Well, that is a relief since we're about
to, but it's complicated.
>> And the reason for that is that you've
had a lot of economic shocks hit the UK
since then, the pandemic, the energy
crisis,
>> various [music] government policies that
have also been very bad for the economy,
in particular our energy policy. It's
impossible to say that having the most
expensive
>> [music]
>> energy in the developed world hasn't
made a significant difference.
>> So, disentangling the Brexit effect from
all those other effects is really,
really difficult, but perhaps not
impossible. And here's how.
What we've done is bring together a
sample of 23 OECD countries and pick out
the economies most similar historically
to the UK.
And use those countries as a guide for
how the UK might have been expected to
perform.
>> Had it remained in the EU, that is. And
that's what you're seeing here. The red
line being the UK's actual GDP, the
white one what our model initially
suggests it could have been.
>> And what we see is a 10% hit to the
economy.
>> Which for the UK's 3 trillion-pound
[music] economy means 300 billion
pounds. So clearly, that's pretty
massive.
>> But if you look beneath the hood, it
shows that most [music] of it is driven
by the performance of the US and Irish
economies.
>> Now, the latter's GDP is heavily
impacted by the activity of
multinational companies. So there's a
case for removing [music] it.
>> So if we exclude Ireland, we reduce the
hit to 6%. And then there's the question
about the US economy. It accounts for
about 4 percentage points of the total
[music] gap. But a lot of that is
nothing to do with Brexit. The US didn't
experience the energy shock in 2022.
>> It also benefited from significant
fiscal stimulus and AI investment. And
so if we adjust for all that, too,
>> we get down to a number between 2 and 4%
of GDP, which we think is a reasonable
estimate [music] for the hit to the
economy.
>> This figure is far away from the initial
10% calculation, which we've shown to be
too great. But even so, 2 to 4% is still
a hit.
>> No matter which way you cut it, it's
quite hard to come up with a positive
number for the impact of Brexit.
>> It would be very foolish to say that
leaving the EU had been an absolute
negative, just as it would be very
foolish to say that [music] being a
member of the EU had been an absolute
positive on all the things to do with
AI.
>> Britain has probably [music] benefited a
little bit by being outside the European
Union, which most of the tech giants in
America are slightly [music] scared of.
And on different days of the week, um,
Britain's been quite good at getting on
with Donald Trump.
>> Financial services in particular have
done pretty well in the years since we
left the EU, much better than goods
[music] exports, for example.
>> We're a massive destination for VC
funding. A large number of the
investment funds that are based in the
EU are run out of London. We're a
massive center for derivative [music]
trading in the Europe.
>> But there's no denying it, Brexit did
put us on a different trajectory. There
were some real economic impacts
>> [music]
>> and potentially some much larger
political ones.
>> The most surprising thing that happened
is the degree of political chaos [music]
it has unleashed.
>> This parliament is a disgrace.
>> The political [music] infighting was
extraordinary, cross-party and
relentless.
>> For goodness sake, Prime Minister, won't
you just go?
>> This government has no mandate for the
vicious form of Brexit it is pursuing.
>> the economic impact it almost seems like
a side show [music] relative to that.
>> We've had, I think, it's five prime
ministers since Brexit. [music]
>> Cameron didn't try and deliver Brexit,
he simply resigned. Theresa May tried to
deliver it and resigned. Boris Johnson
tried to deliver [music] it and
resigned. Liz Truss resigned. And Rishi
Sunak was eventually defeated in the
elections. What's interesting about
Brexit is it re-divided British politics
along completely new lines.
And it's ended up the two main parties,
particularly really the Conservatives,
being very wounded by it.
>> The fragmentation is clear when you look
at how people said they'd vote in 2016
and compare it to how they said they'd
vote this year.
The pie has become notably more
colorful. Good news for chart designers,
less so for members of parliament.
>> I feel like a pawn in a big game of
chess.
>> Uncover [music] more at
bloomberg.com/videos.
>> I think there is a link between the
divisions within and what we see now an
age of greater multi-party politics in
the UK. [music]
>> Brexit still governs a lot of the kind
of dividing lines in Britain.
>> It has contributed to the stagnation
that leads [music] the popular
discontent.
>> Those who had previously been trusted to
make decisions sitting in [music]
Westminster, they're learning to live
with much reduced credibility and much
reduced room for maneuver.
>> Is time running out for you Prime
Minister?
>> We lost our ability to focus on the
really fundamental things that matter.
How to [music] improve our productivity,
which is dismally low, and how to
improve the quality of our government.
>> Our policies around our tax regime,
around our energy regime, how we employ
people and how we pay to employ [music]
people, our social care.
>> I think one big lesson of the last few
years and indeed the whole Brexit
experience is that economics is not the
only thing that matters.
>> Brexit was a big moment for expansive
>> [music]
>> political promises about the golden
horizons that lay beyond the result.
>> We will do a new deal.
A better deal.
>> And for many people that has not been
delivered.
>> The Brexit vote was driven to a very
very considerable [music] extent by the
fact that immigration was rising in this
country and the fact that the political
elite was constantly promising to
control immigration.
>> Enough is enough.
>> And failing [music] to deliver on that
promise.
>> In the decade before the referendum,
migration climbed towards record levels
reaching a peak just ahead of the vote.
>> What many people thought when they were
voting for [music] Brexit was that there
would be a reduction in numbers. One of
the great expectations was that a fall
[music] off in immigration would improve
employment prospects and wage prospects
in some of the left behind [music]
areas, but of course what actually
happened was a massive increase in
immigration.
>> That increase is what you're seeing
here. But what's important to note is
origin.
Since 2016, the proportion of those
originating [music] from the EU has
decreased, but the number of arrivals
from non-EU countries have gone up.
>> They went up for [music] practical
reasons because Boris Johnson
as a prime minister was desperate to
fill [music] a lot of gaps in the labor
market that had been left after COVID.
>> In recent years, small boat arrivals
became a defining symbol of the Brexit
era, convincing many voters that the
country still hasn't taken back control.
>> And this is when Brexit has become this
self-reinforcing
>> [music]
>> process because as the number of
immigrants have increased, the people
who voted for Brexit have felt cheated.
>> People were made big promises by leaders
who largely did not stay the course to
deliver them. And I think that has had a
widespread impact [music]
in unleashing a disillusionment, a
frustration.
>> A fuller picture now emerges. Brexit was
a promise of control, prosperity, and
more money for things like the NHS,
three of [music] Britain's great pillars
after tea, the monarchy, and
apologizing.
>> sorry.
>> And so far, the data show the results of
that promise to be a bit underwhelming.
Meanwhile, pandemics, [music] wars, and
energy crises exacerbated resentment and
frustration that everything's just a lot
[music] worse and a lot smaller than it
used to be. And not just [music] in
Britain. Brexit was domestic politics
with foreign policy consequences.
>> What it did was to set off a sort of
populist revolution that spread around
the world.
>> There is a new sheriff in town.
>> We want a piece of ice [music] for world
protection.
>> Because of the world that Brexit ushered
in, a much more nationalistic one, and
one where [music] America's tried to go
in a different direction, and Europe's
going in a different direction.
Competing nationalisms are suddenly to
the fore. The idea of the West uniting
[music]
to deal with, most obviously, Ukraine.
And that has all gone somewhat into
reverse.
>> I've empowered you to be a tough guy.
And I don't think you'd be a tough guy
without the United States.
>> Europe and America together is a very,
very hard thing for anyone to stand up
against. But when they're running in
different directions, it's not a great
look.
>> The forces that Brexit unleashed created
not just a more fragmented world, but a
world which is divided [music] into big
trading blocks. The European Union, the
United States, and to some extent, Asian
countries. And that leaves Britain out,
[music] isolated on its own.
>> There's less reason to talk to us if
you're the US, for example, because
we're not that way into to Europe as a,
you know, route to influencing Europe.
There's less reason to pay attention to
us in the United Nations.
>> work with others.
>> You look at political debate, it has
always been full of emotion, anger, many
different things which really involve
the heart more than the brain. I think
what's interesting about politics across
much of the West since the vote is that
it's come much more about anger,
injustice, people protesting about a
world they often don't understand.
>> And this strange logic of this anger is
to [music] demand madder music and
stronger wine. So, instead of saying,
"Well, perhaps populism is a mistake,
perhaps we ought to be a little bit more
pragmatic. You say, "Well, let's try
harder to deliver these impossible
[music] dreams."
>> In Britain, politicians who speak the
language of betrayal and unfinished
Brexit business have found a large
audience.
>> The single politician, Nigel Farage, who
had most it involvement in making that
Brexit happen, is the favorite to win
the next election and be Prime Minister.
>> That is completely shaking up British
politics.
>> Cuz they're an absolute disgrace.
>> The prospect has opponents therefore
pushing ever harder in the other
direction. Some advocate rejoining the
EU, something a recent poll suggested
52% of the British public would now
support.
>> In the last four years, two Prime
Ministers, Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer,
have sought to bring the UK closer to
the EU with agreements and attempts at
agreement in different areas that really
>> [music]
>> matter. Defense, security, immigration,
economics. [music]
>> Many of the easy solutions to the Brexit
problem, which are Britain having a
closer but still rather loose
relationship with [music] the European
Union, seem very attractive, but they're
not actually all that practical.
>> Any move closer to the EU also runs into
two familiar problems. Britain still
dislikes being told what to do.
Careful,
and Europe isn't especially keen to
start convincing it otherwise.
>> It is time to leave Brexit behind.
>> My guess is that Britain ends up with
some kind of version of an associate
membership of the EU. And yes, that
would involve Britain having to take
some rules in [music] a way that it
might object to, but it would give it
access to that much larger market.
And it would help the European Union as
well.
>> [music]
>> One of the other tragic consequences of
Brexit is that European Union has seen
[music] one of the biggest economies in
Europe leaving and leaving for very
specific reasons [music] to do with free
movement of people and has not learned
anything from it.
>> I think the most optimistic version of
what you could say [music] is you could
say well this was a test case for
democracy. A country votes to do
something
>> [music]
>> that it knows to be a sort of act of
self-harm and yet still there is no
challenge to the idea of democracy.
[music] It's still the core of
everything that Britain does.
>> Perhaps over time we'll be able to see
it as a moment that reshaped alliances
[music] and relationships and that that
is a necessary thing for nations and
regions over time.
>> The future has to involve leaving the
arguments [music] about Brexit behind
and focusing on the things that are
really holding the UK [music] back
today.
>> I think the big lesson for economists is
that yeah there's there's more to life
than
>> economics. The sort of chastening lesson
for for policy makers [music]
was that even when you think the economy
is doing well, you think people are
being well served, if you're leaving
[music] a significant chunk behind,
given the chance, they will punish you
and they'll punish the system [music]
and you won't necessarily get a do-over.
>> [music]